How To Open a Bank Account and What You Need To Do It. To open an account, you'll need to choose a bank and provide the bank with some necessary information, including your identification and proof of address. You'll usually need to be 18 to meet the bank's eligibility requirements. Finally, you might need to fund the account or have a minimum balance to avoid fees. Key Takeaways. To open an account, you'll need to bring a government-issued ID, your identification number, and your physical and mailing address. When deciding on an account, you'll want to read the disclosures so you can learn about any account fees or balance minimums. You can decide what bank or account you want based on the features you're looking for, whether it's high-interest rates, low balance minimums, no ATM fees, or something else. What You Need To Open a Bank Account. When you open a new bank account, you'll need to give the bank or credit union documentation so they can verify your identify. Have the following items ready: A government-issued ID (such as a driver’s license, passport, or military ID). Your identification number. Proof of your physical and mailing address. An initial deposit (if required). If you don’t have a government-issued ID, you may be able to use another form of ID. Ask your bank what other forms of identification it can accept. Depending on your situation, your identification number may be your Social Security number, alien identification card number, Individual Tax Payer Identification Number, or another government-issued ID number. If you're a United States citizen, your identification number is most likely your Social Security number. You'll need to provide this information in some form whether you're opening up an account online or in person.Choose a Bank or Credit Union. After you have all of your documents together, you'll want to choose the best bank or credit union for your situation. If you know what type of account you want, you can look for the best deals, whether you're in the market for an online checking account, a high-yield savings account, or something else. There are three basic categories of financial institutions: Banks, including community banks and big banks: These might be well-known brands in your local community, or nationwide. They should offer most of the basic services you need, including checking and savings accounts, debit and credit cards, mortgages, personal loans, and more. Credit unions: A credit union is a customer-owned financial institution that provides many of the same services and products that banks provide. If you opt to join one of these not-for-profit institutions, you'll often enjoy competitive rates because they're not necessarily trying to maximize profits. But that’s not always the case—so review fee schedules carefully. Online banks and credit unions: These institutions operate entirely online. There’s no branch to visit (or pay for), and you’ll handle most service requests yourself. If you have access to and are comfortable using a computer or mobile device—and performing basic banking transactions—an online bank can help you reduce your fees and earn higher interest rates on savings accounts. 
