Housing and Homelessness Programs. The Housing and Homelessness Division (HHD) is within the California Department of Social Services (CDSS). The Division is responsible for program development and oversight of statewide housing programs funded by the CDSS. The Division also serves as a statewide technical assistance provider to all of California’s social services agencies. The Division aims to streamline services on both the local and statewide level to promote equal access to safe and affordable housing for all Californians. To learn more about accessing housing and homeless services in your community, please contact the local Homeless Continuum of Care or County Welfare Department. Project Roomkey/Homelessness COVID Response. The purpose of Project Roomkey is to provide non-congregate sheltering for people experiencing homelessness, to protect human life, and minimize strain on health care system capacity. CalWORKs Housing Support Program (HSP). The CalWORKs Housing Support Program (HSP) fosters housing stability for families experiencing homelessness. HSP assists homeless CalWORKs families in obtaining permanent housing and can provide temporary shelter, help with moving costs, short to medium-term rental subsidies, and wraparound case management. CalWORKs Homeless Assistance (HA). The CalWORKs Homeless Assistance (HA) Program aims to help CalWORKs families meet the reasonable costs of securing housing. The CalWORKs HA program serves eligible CalWORKs recipients, or apparently eligible CalWORKs applicants, who are homeless or at risk of homelessness. CalWORKs HA can provide payments for temporary shelter for up to 16 cumulative calendar days, as well as payments to secure or maintain housing, including a security deposit and last month’s rent, or up to two months of rent arrearages. Bringing Families Home Program (BFH). The Bringing Families Home (BFH) program helps reduce the number of families in the child welfare system experiencing homelessness, increase family reunification, and prevent foster care placements. BFH serves homeless families involved with the child welfare system and is designed to offer housing supports in order for families to successfully reunify. Housing and Disability Advocacy Program (HDAP). The Housing and Disability Advocacy Program (HDAP) assists homeless and disabled individuals apply for disability benefit programs, while also providing housing support. The HDAP requires that participating counties offer outreach, case management, benefits advocacy, and housing supports to all program participants. Home Safe Program. The Home Safe Program supports the safety and housing stability of individuals involved in Adult Protective Services (APS) who are experiencing, or at imminent risk of experiencing, homelessness due to elder or dependent adult abuse, neglect, self-neglect, or financial exploitation by providing housing-related assistance using evidence-based practices for homeless assistance and prevention. Community Care Expansion Program (CCE). The CCE program was established by Assembly Bill No. 172 (Chapter 69, Statutes of 2021) and will provide $805 million in funding for acquisition, construction, and rehabilitation to preserve and expand adult and senior care facilities that serve SSI/SSP and Cash Assistance Program for Immigrants (CAPI) applicants and recipients, including those who are experiencing homelessness or at risk of homelessness.
