Original Card for a U.S. Born Adult. Important. You must present original documents or copies certified by the agency that issued them. We cannot accept photocopies or notarized copies. All documents must be current (not expired). We cannot accept a receipt showing you applied for the document. What original documents do I need? Citizenship. We can accept only certain documents as proof of U.S. citizenship. These include a U.S. birth certificate or a U.S. passport. Age. You must present your birth certificate. If one exists, you must submit it. If a birth certificate does not exist, we may be able to accept your: Religious record made before the age of five showing your date of birth; U.S. hospital record of your birth. U.S. passport. Anyone age 12 or older requesting an original Social Security number (SSN) must appear in person for an interview. We will ask for evidence to show you do not have an SSN. Here are examples of documents you can use to prove an SSN was never assigned: If you lived outside the United States for an extended period, a current or previous passport, school and/or employment records, and any other record that would show long-term residence outside the United States could be used to show you do not have an SSN. If you have lived in the United States and you are applying for an original SSN, we may ask you for information about the schools you attended or we may ask you to provide copies of tax records that would show you were never assigned an SSN. Identity. We can accept only certain documents as proof of identity. An acceptable document must be current (not expired) and show your name, identifying information (date of birth or age) and preferably a recent photograph. For example, as proof of identity we must see your: U.S. driver's license. State-issued non-driver identification card. U.S. passport. If you do not have one of these specific documents or you cannot get a replacement for one of them within 10 days, we will ask to see other documents. Any documents submitted, including the following, must be current (not expired) and show your name, identifying information (date of birth or age) and preferably a recent photograph: Employee identification card. School identification card. Health insurance card (not a Medicare card). U.S. military identification card. Note. We may use one document for two purposes. For example, we may use your U.S. passport as proof of both citizenship and identity. However, you must provide at least two separate documents. Replacement Card for a Foreign Born U. S. Citizen Adult. You can replace your Social Security card for free if it is lost or stolen. However, you may not need to get a replacement card. Knowing your Social Security number is what's important. You are limited to three (3) replacement cards in a year and 10 during your lifetime. Legal name changes do not count toward these limits. Also, you may not be affected by these limits if you can prove you need the card to prevent a significant hardship. Important. You must present original documents or copies certified by the agency that issued them. We cannot accept photocopies or notarized copies. All documents must be current (not expired). We cannot accept a receipt showing you applied for the document. You may be able to request your replacement Social Security card online. Our online service is a fast and secure way to get a replacement. If you are age 18 or older with a U.S. mailing address and have a my Social Security account, you can apply for a replacement card online. For more information about creating my Social Security account and getting a replacement card online, visit our Social Security Number and Card website.
